right hello everyone my name is Jay I'm
one of the expert IELTS teachers at e to
language in this live class we're going
to look at IELTS academic writing task 1
and specifically we're going to look at
line graphs even more specifically we're
going to look at this line graph here
and we're going to learn how to write a
top scoring task 1 how to do this I'm
going to show you a structure that you
can use for any of the graphs that you
see whether it be pie charts or line
graphs or double pie charts or whatever
the structure that I'll show you will
apply to them all apart from the process
is one which is a little bit different
first thing we need to do though is
before we begin is we need some language
for these graphs so we can communicate
I'm gonna just show you the graph part
so here we have the the the vertical
axis the y axis the y axis so we'll be
talking about the y axis we'll also be
talking about the horizontal or x-axis
you need to understand how that works in
particular this graph here is looking at
different sweeteners here you can see
the line that is the total line it in
terms of its y-axis ranges from about a
hundred and twenty right up to about a
hundred and sixty and just so you know
because it's actually written in the
task which I'll show you in a second
this is talking about pounds pounds
pounds of sweeteners pounds of
sweeteners okay cool and then we've got
refined cane and beet sugars that's the
blue line we're going to be talking
about that we've got corn sweeteners
which is the orange line we'll also talk
about that and we've got honey and
edibles syrups now you probably have no
idea what's going on that's because we
haven't read the task description we
need to get into that so what does the
task say the task says this and it sits
on top of your graph on test day in its
app
solutely critical for you to understand
to get a high score this one says this
one says the first sentence here says
the graph below shows the availability
of various sweetness in pounds in the
USA from 1966 to 2012 ok now just a
little word of caution the graph that
you get on Tuesday won't be colorful it
will be black and white or shades of
grey but just for our exercise to make
this easier we'll do it in colors so
that's what we're looking at that's what
this thing is here it's a line graph
showing the availability of various
sweeteners in pounds and this is the
x-axis from 1966 to 2012 fine now we
know what we're looking at what are the
instructions because below the
description of the graph you'll have a
second sentence and the second sentence
says summarize the information by
selecting and reporting the main
features and make comparisons where
relevant we can make this simpler if we
look at it it really has three things
you need to do it says summarize the
information
number two is select and report the main
features and three is make comparisons
these are the instructions on every
single IELTS writing task one for
academic it always says the same thing
it always says whoa what's going on for
my computer there hold on hold on hold
on get them little meltdown okay I think
that's all right I'm back
hold on technological error there let's
go back it always says it always says
summarize the information by selecting
and reporting the main features and make
comparisons where relevant doesn't
matter if you're talking about a pie
chart a line graph a process or diagram
anything you have or a bar chart it will
be the same
so we need to follow a structure and I
believe that this one is a
superstructure because it really does
tick off all of those instructions or
all of the things that I also want you
to do in essence what we're going to do
is three things we're going to summarize
describe and compare there the three
things that we're going to do what our
IELTS writing task 1 will look like is
this
ok so first of all we have the summary
we're gonna start with the summary here
we're gonna summarize in a single
sentence I'll show you how to do that
then we're gonna describe the main
features here then we're going to make
comparisons relevant comparisons here
and we're going to tick off those three
instructions that the IELTS wanted us to
do so let's talk about how to summarize
that's the first sentence that you're
going to write the first thing that it's
dead easy it's dead easy all you need to
do is rewrite the task in your own words
to say the exact same thing okay maybe
it's not that dead easy what you need to
do is you take that sentence sorry
something's going on with my technology
just there with me all right
beauty of live-streaming hey this is
what happens so rewrite the task in your
own words to say the exact same thing so
this is what I did the graph below the
given line graph shows represents the
availability of various sweeteners how
much sweetener was available in pounds
in pounds in the USA in the United
States from 1966 to 2012 over 46 year
period cool so I've just all you need to
do is you take that task you say okay
here's the first phrase the graph below
you can use this phrase here the given
line graph
then you need a synonym for the verb
shows represents that's easy
here are the availability of various
sweeteners or how much sweetener was
available in pounds in pounds this stays
the same because it's impossible to
write that differently I think maybe you
have a different idea in the USA in the
United States from 1966 to 2012 over a
46 year period so what I've effectively
done is taken that and re-written it
here in a single sentence so now I want
you to do the same thing rewrite this
sentence in your own words please you
have one minute
thirty seconds left
all right let's have a look at some of
these answers here the line graph
illustrates good good great synonym
there illustrates represents shows the
line graph illustrates the information
or illustrates information about
different sweetener availability in
pounds during 1966 note from 1966 to
2012 in the United States that's good so
you've moved some information around
what you've said has captured the exact
same thing and that's the most important
thing ok sometimes you have to use the
same phrase because from 1966 to 2012
you can't say during 1966 that changes
the meaning of it significantly the
given data demonstrates actually data
demonstrate data demonstrates data
demonstrates datum demonstrates data
demonstrate singular the given data
demonstrate how much sweetener was
available in the US over approximately
four decades good but number four I
would write for as a word not a number
good the graph depicts the amount of
varieties of sweeteners available in the
United States in periods of four and
over the period of four over the period
of four and a half decades good the line
graph demonstrates doesn't demonstrate
demonstrates the wrong synonym represent
depicts illustrates these are the types
of words not demonstrate demonstrates is
used for moving things like you can
demonstrate a robot or you can
demonstrate a website because it moves
and you can move it so wrong word there
but that's okay that line graph depicts
the variety of sweet sweeteners in the
United States of America over forty a
forty six year period good the line
chart highlights to what extent
different sweetened of sweeteners were
were available not our available were
available in the United States over a
forty five year period starting from
1966 good well done that's pretty
straightforward
so we've just
summarized or written a summary which is
fine now we need to describe this is
part to describe so we need to describe
the main trends we don't want to include
any data so nothing from the y axis not
yet that comes in part three the x axis
is okay we can talk about years but
really the critical thing here is just
describing main trends not specific
y-axis data we don't want any y axis
data
let me just read your mind mine says in
total sweetener availability increased
until around the year 2000 before it
receded the amount of refined cane and
beet sugars decreased and then plateaued
corn sweeteners increase consistently
until 1880 1982 and then steadied before
beginning to fall from around 1999 the
availability of honey and edible syrups
remain relatively lower and stable over
the period so I want you to write
something similar first I want you to
write one sentence that describes this
total main trend you have 1 minutes you
can use the x-axis but not the y-axis so
nothing whoops
sorry let me go back here nothing from
here you can use this though so go ahead
and write your first sentence
just gonna help you out here I'm gonna
something interesting happened about
here which you may want to talk about
just generally describe this trend it's
a bit of AI I suspected it's a bit of an
upward slightly upward trend before
there and then it decreased what's this
this is about 97 98 about 1998 or 1999
say 1998 so that's probably the general
trend that you want to want to describe
let's have a look at some of your
sentences
all right you need a little bit more
time that's fine
cool what have you got for me now whoops
something's going on in my webinar I
believe something's going on
No all right let me just give you a bit
of a hint here I'm gonna read you mine
mine says this in total sweetener
availability increased until around the
year 2000 before it receded that's it
that's my one sentence in total
sweetener availability increased until
around the year 2000 before it receded
so there it is again so I just want to
make sure that you guys are writing
yours okay good here we go uh sorry I
just wanted you to write one sentence
that's why I had thought why I was
waiting so long you guys have gone ahead
and written the whole thing let's do it
sentence by sentence so let's go back I
just I'm just gonna read your first
sentences over all through the years
okay I wanted that first and in in
general there's a fluctuation in the
total sweetener until 1991 and then
gradually increase in peaked at 2001
after which it receded I'll clean that
up
in general sweetener availability
fluctuated sweetener availability
subject fluctuated verb until around the
year 2000 before it receded something
like that Sandia generally the
availability of sweetness increased
until around the year 1999 before it
decreased beautiful well then overall
what stands out from the graph Nora
let's not do any of that sort of
language we just want to get straight to
describing the graph not what stands out
from the graph just overall sweetener
availability subject-verb-object suite
and availability increased until 1999
before decreasing something like that
cool let's do the rest of these sentence
by sentence okay so we've done the first
sentence of our second part of the
describing the main trends let's now
look at the second sentence
I wrote the amount of refined cane and
beet sugars decreased and then plateaued
so we're looking at this blue line here
now you may want to mention the year in
which it plateaued something like that
but I want you to write one sentence one
sentence about refined cane and beet
sugars that's the blue line you have one
minute
you can write two sentences by the way
if you want doesn't have to be one
sentence but one sentence would be good
all right let me check some of your
sentences here let's see what you've got
about refined cane and beet sugars the
availability of refined cane and beet
sugars continued to fall until 1986
. after that period comma it reached a
plateau good so you've written two
sentences about the cane and beet sugars
that's fine in 1986 while refined cane
and beet sugars reached its lowest
percentage corn sweetener started to
rise no no we're not comparing it that
happens in part three so we don't want
to get into any comparisons of the
yellow and the blue light no in this
part we in the second part where we
describe the general trends we just talk
about one line only blue line that's it
not blue and orange just blue line okay
it asks you to compare but we do that in
part three and I'll show you that in a
second
suresh the amount of available refined
cane and beet sugar gradually decreased
until 1986
. after that it was steady fine well
done in terms of refined and beet sugars
a steady decrease can be seen until 1986
with some fluctuations plural before
plateauing plateauing until 2011 good
the amount of refining cane sugar and
beat cane and beet sugars decreased and
then stabilized for the rest of the
period good well done spot on spot on
spot on let's keep doing this sentence
by sentence because now we're going to
talk about i'm gonna go and talk about
the orange line or corn sweeteners and i
said corn sweeteners increased
consistently until 1982 and then
steadied before beginning to fall from
around 1999 so now i want you to write
one sentence on this orange e line here
corn sweetness if we look at it before
you start writing there's something
going on here there's an increase and
then something happened here
and then it's sort of it was it sort of
still increased something happened here
a bit of a turn in the data and then it
starts to do that so please in one
sentence see if you can capture this
information
okay what have we got in the chat here
all right not quite yet that's okay
all right here we go corn sweeteners
gradually rose until 2001 then
moderately dropped good fine
nice and clear nice and simple you've
just described the main trend of that
orange line good well done the
availability of corn sweeteners remained
increased no increase not remained
increased just increase steadily up to
two words 1985 alright this is a little
bit clumsy this one and then from the
year 2000 it rose with fluctuations and
Pete
full-stop after that period it started
to fall for the rest of the time what I
want you to do is try and as a bit of
homework is try and see if you can write
these capture that in one sentence
rather than three really what we want to
show the examiner is we have the ability
to describe the main trend even if it
goes up down fluctuates and up again we
want to tell the examiner that we can
describe that in a single sentence by
saying the availability of corn
sweeteners increased until 1998 before
fluctuating slightly and then it rose
dramatically whatever it is so we want
to capture that in one sentence or two
but one would be better corn sweeteners
showed a stiff hike okay not stiff like
that's not a academic collocation we'd
only used that dramatic increase a
significant increase would be good until
1986 followed by a gradual increase
reaching the heart reaching a peak
reaching a peak in 2011 before going
down until 2003 2001 to 2011 last one
corn sweeteners increased considerably
until 1986 and then rose gradually
before falling steadily that is a
beautiful sentence well done
cool all right let's do this last
sentence here now what I've done have a
look at mine it says
the availability of honey and edible
syrups remained relatively low and
stable over the period now the only
reason that I've talked about these two
together is because they've followed
almost identical trajectories over time
honey and edible syrups what did I say I
said the availability of honey and
edible syrups remained relatively low
and stable over the period so let's do
that I want you to describe honey and
edible syrups in one what I'm doing here
I told you off before because I didn't
want you to compare I didn't want you to
say while corn syrups did this cane and
beets did this that's a comparison this
is okay because they follow the same
trajectory so we're not comparing them
we're just still describing the trends
but we're describing both at the same
time there's a bit of a difference I'll
show you in in um part three where we
compare but for now let's just describe
honey and edible syrups the availability
of them in one sentence what did they do
over the period
all right these don't need to be too
complex by the way the amount of honey
and edible syrups remain quite low and
steady over the period beautiful what's
going on my thing hold on hold on I'm
losing technology here some chords I
believe whoa don't die technology don't
die this still working that is still
working all right cool sorry crazy
technology both honey and edible serious
remains steady and low throughout the
period good nice clean and simple well
done honey and edible service remain
available at lower levels and remain
steady over the whole period yep good
yep good fine honey and edible syrups
seem to be not seemed to be ah not seen
they are you need to be confident when
you say this honey and edible syrups
followed a similar trend and remained
steady something like that cool that's
fine that's fine that's fine
good so what do we do here we described
main trends I said in total sweetener
availability increased until around the
year 2000 that was the Green Line before
it receded then I talked about the blue
line I said the amount of refined cane
and beet sugars decreased and then
plateaued then I talked about the orange
line corn sweeteners increased
consistently until 1982 and then steady
before beginning to fall from around
1999 then I talked about the honey and
edible syrups line and I said the
availability of honey and edible syrups
remain relatively low and stable over
the period in this description I did not
use any data from the y-axis I just
simply described the main trends of the
lines that's all you have to do and if
you get a pie chart all you do is
describe the main parts of the pie you
don't compare you don't use any
percentages nothing you just describe
the main trends odds it's pretty simple
to do it's a pretty simple paragraph to
write ok now we head into part three
where we're going to start comparing
data this
where it gets a little bit tricky I'm
gonna step you through it sentence by
sentence this is the comparison so what
we need to do is choose two lines and we
need to compare their trends so this is
where we get into saying stuff like
while the blue line did there's the
orange line did this or while honey did
this the other edible syrups did this
comparisons comparisons and we can
include y-axis information or that
vertical axis there okay now let me ask
you a question we need to select
relevant trends to compare now this is
up to you this is up to you just tell me
forget total forget the total don't talk
about the Green Line which ones are you
going to compare let's just let's just
do a little thing in the chat so let's
talk about let's just call this sugars
will call this sweeteners will call this
honey and we call this syrups so which
two lines will you compare first and
which two lines will you compare second
which is the most relevant which are the
most relevant lines to compare I don't
know about you but I would definitely
compare sugars with sweeteners because
look at this blue line it goes like this
then actually meets the orange line and
the orange line goes up like this and it
meets and it the kind of similar and
then similarly what I'm going to do is
I'm gonna compare honey
with these syrups so I'm gonna compare
these two and I'm gonna compare these
two now why did I make that decision why
did I decide to compare the honey sorry
the sugars with the sweeteners and the
honey's with the syrups
because visually when I look at this
graph I thought that they were the most
interesting things to compare because I
didn't want to compare a straight line
with one that did this that's true I
don't know it's this is a decision you
have to make on test day and you have to
decide which two lines you will compare
okay so now let's do this we're gonna do
the same ones together
and we're going to compare the the the
sugars with the sweeteners and this is
what I wrote I said from 1966 to 1985
refined cane and beet sugars in corn
sweeteners followed a very different
trend look at that they followed a very
different trend so I said these guys
followed a very different trend one
basically went down and one went up
that was my first sentence so I talked
about this part here ok let's do that
let's do it sentence by sentence I want
you to compare this part with this part
here you have one minute until what year
is this this is about
I don't know 1985 see
so compare the blue and the orange until
1985 how can you do that
I also want you to include some y-axis
data so if you can by the way remember
this is in pounds so I want you to talk
about something here perhaps and then
this part here and here - sup - up to
alright I'm just gonna check that chat
what have we got alright so here we go
unlike at I start sugar dropped over the
first 20 years which is contrasted with
a modest start of sweetness that rose in
the same period after 1986 both
fluctuated but corn reached its peak in
2006 before dropping again to be
slightly less available in sugar good
Sherif well done your grammars needs
work though your grammars I can see
you've understood that clearly what's
going on with the trends and the
comparison but your grammars letting you
down there as the verbs are a bit off so
you need to work there from 1966 to 99
85 both sugars and corn sweeteners
followed opposite trends good well done
Cho refined cane and beet sugars started
at a hundred pounds and gradually
decreased until 1985 good and then you
could talk about the other one as well
it started here and then the increased
until here good remember to use that
y-axis data the refined sugars and corn
sweeteners followed opposite trends over
the period of the first two decades
great the sugars started to be available
at around a hundred pounds on the
contrary corn sweeteners began from just
20 pounds excellent you're comparing and
you're using data from the y-axis that's
important good good good good good good
that requires a bit of work that's a
tricky tricky tricky one two really
tricky let's go back and just look at
mine where's mine here so I said from
1966 to 1985
so what's that 1966 is here until 1985
okay so I've identified that time period
and then I said refined cane and beet
sugars and corn sweeteners followed a
very different trend then I've started
to include the y-axis data so I've
started the hundred-pound thing here the
sugars started at around a hundred
pounds per person while corn sweeteners
started at around eighteen pounds per
person
by 1985 however the two sweeteners met
at approximately 62 pounds from there
they diverged they diverged again before
meeting whoops I've got an error here
before meeting again in 2007 and around
63 pounds so let's have a look at how I
did that let's go back to the graph here
so I started off by identifying a time
period I said from 1966 until 1985 I
said they followed very different trends
I could have talked about one decrease
while one increase fine
then I said they met at about 19 or they
they met at around 1995 before diverging
again and following and then I said they
met again in 2007 and I also mentioned
here the starting availability pounds
for both of them and I also said they
met they both met here in 1985 at around
62 pounds or whatever it was so you
really have to analyze these graphs you
really have to I mean you don't have to
be precise you don't have to be you know
it's impossible to know precisely how
many pounds so you do have to make a bit
of a guess
I said 62 or whatever it was that's fine
cool I'm gonna leave that one um because
you can write that in your own time like
you can press pause if you like watch
this again and and finish off that one
but what you really need to do here is
break it down is break it down so you
you're comparing these two fine break it
down section by section so this would be
section one these two parts here okay
that's your section one and you talk
about that then you talk about this part
here where they met that's your section
two then you might discuss this part
here section three and you're comparing
the whole time and you might talk about
here section four so they might be your
four sentences and
comparing the lines as you go in each
sentence so it's a bit of a tricky thing
to do let's move on let's talk about
this part here we want to compare this
we sort of did this in the first part of
the description but now we want to
compare ok this is what I wrote now I
wrote in contrast to sugars and
sweeteners because I wanted to connect
this Honey and syrups barely changed
they started at around 15 pounds each so
y-axis information and by the end of the
period were almost the same so I have
compared them and I've you some y-axis
information so let's do that I want you
to compare these two lines and I want
you to make a link to these two and say
in contrast to sugars and sweeteners
something like that so we might start by
saying oops sorry
in contrast
cool by the way I should have mentioned
that I want you to include this
information here from the y-axis so we
don't really know how much that is but
we can make a sort of guess and say I
don't know 4 and whatever 12 doesn't
really matter there let's have a look at
the chat here
good ok some people have used the phrase
on the other hand but to be personally I
don't like it I think it's not academic
enough so in contrast would probably be
a better phrase to use so in contrast
there was no fluctuations in honey and
syrup prices not these aren't about
prices remember this is availability so
don't put anything like that in and
remain just below 10 pounds okay good
let's try again
in contrast both honey and syrups hardly
changed over the whole period good
simple clear I like it they started from
15 pounds each and with little
fluctuations they were as maned as it is
till the end good well done smaran occur
in contrast to sugars and sweeteners
honey and edible syrups remained low and
steady starting at around 10 pounds in
1966 and ending with around the same
amount beautiful well done good good
good good
cool all right good good good so I don't
want to recap there I want to read this
whole thing to you sorry this one here
so in contrast sugars and sweeteners
honey and syrups barely changed they
started at around 15 pounds each and by
the end of the period were almost the
same so that's it that's it that's it
that's it let's recap so we needed to do
three things we needed to summarize
describe the main trends and then
compare the data or compare the lines
and this is what your task should look
like on your paper it should be
separated three distinct parts the first
one is a summary where you
just rewrite the task the second one the
description you just describe the
general trends of single lines the third
one is where you compare lines and you
have to make the decision as to which
lines you will compare and then you what
you need to do in that third parties as
I said break it up
look at it in time aspects so the first
few years what happened with with sugars
and sweeteners and then in the next time
period what happened with sugars and
sweeteners and then in the final time
sweetness and that's what you need to do
you need to compare over those three
time periods then the next thing you
look at is the other two lines and you
need to connect it somehow and say in
contrast to the sugars and sweetness
honey's and edible syrups well what
happened to them they started here they
fluctuated slightly and they ended at
about the same amount so you've compared
those two as well cool and that's how it
all should look that's that my friends
by the way if you're on YouTube you're
on youtube check out this website here e
to language dot-com go to that website
get yourself some expert help writing
feedback tutorials live classes you name
it but for now I'm just gonna go to the
chat an answer of whoops and answer a
few questions there chrif is a
conclusion required and if so when
should I write it okay first of all no
you don't require a conclusion you can
write if you're short on words if you
wrote 120 words and you need 30 words or
130 words you need an extra 20 words you
can write another summary sentence at
the end just to get your word count up
to 150 but otherwise if you've written
150 words it's fine okay it's fine
so just you might want to count all of
your words if you've written hundred and
fifty don't write an extra summary if
you haven't written 150
add an extra summary in different words
khushboo what verb tense should we write
the charts and graphs that's a good
question I'm gonna have to look at it to
be perfectly honest right let's have a
look at these verbs let's have a look at
these verbs here represents present
simple was available
that's a past one because we're talking
about a previous period in total
sweetener availability increased now why
are we using past tense here here the
line graph represents because it's in
the present it's just doing that in the
present moment right but here the
sweetener availability increased it's
because our x-axis is in the past now
x-axis is in the past from 1966 to 2011
therefore the data that we're describing
in that graph we will use past tense
verbs let's look at a few more the
amount of refining cane Beach sugars
decreased and then plateaued Edie Edie
Edie past tense corn sweeteners this
sorry that should be addy increased
consistently until 1982 and then
steadied before beginning to fall bla
bla but the availability of honey and
edible syrups remained from 1966 to 1985
refine cane and beet sugars and corn
sweeteners followed past tense
so what verb tense you use it depends on
the x-axis because if it's in the past
you will use past tense verbs if that
x-axis extends into the future you're
going to have to switch to a future
tense verb as well for example you will
you could say something like in 2046
corn sweeteners will increase
significantly will increase
significantly because that's in the
future ok cool cool cool what do we got
what do we got what do we got okay
someone's asking me about could we use
the past perfect tense
Nora no well it depends hold on my alarm
in my office is about to go off
and I'm back and the alarm won't go off
so that's good
okay there's no should we use past
perfect tense or present perfect tense
use verb tenses that are accurate use
verb tenses that do the job that you
want them to do it's not about excuse me
it's not about adding particular verb
tenses to increase your score that in
the essay you get to use different verb
tenses but in writing task 1 no it's
about clear factual writing so you're
probably just going to use present
simple and past simple and that's it ok
cool
all right Sandia it is always
challenging to connect the data of two
different graphs for example a table in
a bar graph yes so what we looked at
tonight was line graphs and we looked at
how to compare two lines right but
sometimes in your IELTS you're going to
have a pie graph a pie chart with a line
graph and then you have to start to
compare those two and that becomes yeah
that began it's the same principle it's
the same structure but the comparisons
become difficult because you have to see
what percentage of something did over a
time period and you have to do those
sorts of comparisons but I'll I'll look
at all the different all the different
types in these classes ok cool I might
leave it there I'll see you guys later
thanks very much for coming along I
appreciate it do check out the website
and I'll see you guys soon